doc/src/devdocs/ast.md, before:

# Julia ASTs

Julia has two representations of code. First there is a surface syntax AST returned by the parser
(e.g. the [`Meta.parse`](@ref) function), and manipulated by macros. It is a structured representation
of code as it is written, constructed by `julia-parser.scm` from a character stream. Next there
is a lowered form, or IR (intermediate representation), which is used by type inference and code
generation. In the lowered form there are fewer types of nodes, all macros are expanded, and all
control flow is converted to explicit branches and sequences of statements. The lowered form is
constructed by `julia-syntax.scm`.

First we will focus on the lowered form, since it is more important to the compiler. It is also
less obvious to the human, since it results from a significant rearrangement of the input syntax.

## Lowered form

The following data types exist in lowered form:

  * `Expr`

    Has a node type indicated by the `head` field, and an `args` field which is a `Vector{Any}` of
    subexpressions.
    While almost every part of a surface AST is represented by an `Expr`, the IR uses only a
    limited number of `Expr`s, mostly for calls, conditional branches (`gotoifnot`), and returns.

  * `Slot`

    Identifies arguments and local variables by consecutive numbering. `Slot` is an abstract type
    with subtypes `SlotNumber` and `TypedSlot`. Both types have an integer-valued `id` field giving
    the slot index. Most slots have the same type at all uses, and so are represented with `SlotNumber`.
    The types of these slots are found in the `slottypes` field of their `MethodInstance` object.
    Slots that require per-use type annotations are represented with `TypedSlot`, which has a `typ`
    field.

  * `CodeInfo`

    Wraps the IR of a method. Its `code` field is an array of expressions to execute.

  * `GotoNode`

    Unconditional branch. The argument is the branch target, represented as an index in
    the code array to jump to.

  * `QuoteNode`

    Wraps an arbitrary value to reference as data. For example, the function `f() = :a` contains a
    `QuoteNode` whose `value` field is the symbol `a`, in order to return the symbol itself instead
    of evaluating it.

  * `GlobalRef`

    Refers to global variable `name` in module `mod`.

  * `SSAValue`

    Refers to a consecutively-numbered (starting at 1) static single assignment (SSA) variable inserted
    by the compiler. The number (`id`) of an `SSAValue` is the code array index of the expression whose
    value it represents.

  * `NewvarNode`

    Marks a point where a variable (slot) is created. This has the effect of resetting a variable to undefined.


### Expr types

These symbols appear in the `head` field of `Expr`s in lowered form.

  * `call`

    Function call (dynamic dispatch). `args[1]` is the function to call, `args[2:end]` are the arguments.

  * `invoke`

    Function call (static dispatch). `args[1]` is the MethodInstance to call, `args[2:end]` are the
    arguments (including the function that is being called, at `args[2]`).

  * `static_parameter`

    Reference a static parameter by index.

  * `gotoifnot`

    Conditional branch. If `args[1]` is false, goes to the index identified in `args[2]`.

  * `=`

    Assignment. In the IR, the first argument is always a Slot or a GlobalRef.

  * `method`

    Adds a method to a generic function and assigns the result if necessary.

    Has a 1-argument form and a 4-argument form. The 1-argument form arises from the syntax `function foo end`.
    In the 1-argument form, the argument is a symbol. If this symbol already names a function in the
    current scope, nothing happens. If the symbol is undefined, a new function is created and assigned
    to the identifier specified by the symbol. If the symbol is defined but names a non-function,
    an error is raised. The definition of "names a function" is that the binding is constant, and
    refers to an object of singleton type. The rationale for this is that an instance of a singleton
    type uniquely identifies the type to add the method to. When the type has fields, it wouldn't
    be clear whether the method was being added to the instance or its type.

    The 4-argument form has the following arguments:

      * `args[1]`

        A function name, or `false` if unknown. If a symbol, then the expression first
        behaves like the 1-argument form above. This argument is ignored from then on. When
        this is `false`, it means a method is being added strictly by type, `(::T)(x) = x`.

      * `args[2]`

        A `SimpleVector` of argument type data. `args[2][1]` is a `SimpleVector` of the
        argument types, and `args[2][2]` is a `SimpleVector` of type variables corresponding
        to the method's static parameters.

      * `args[3]`

        A `CodeInfo` of the method itself. For "out of scope" method definitions (adding a
        method to a function that also has methods defined in different scopes) this is an
        expression that evaluates to a `:lambda` expression.

      * `args[4]`

        `true` or `false`, identifying whether the method is staged (`@generated function`).

  * `const`

    Declares a (global) variable as constant.
  * `null`

    Has no arguments; simply yields the value `nothing`.

  * `new`

    Allocates a new struct-like object. First argument is the type. The [`new`](@ref) pseudo-function is lowered
    to this, and the type is always inserted by the compiler.  This is very much an internal-only
    feature, and does no checking. Evaluating arbitrary `new` expressions can easily segfault.

  * `return`

    Returns its argument as the value of the enclosing function.

  * `the_exception`

    Yields the caught exception inside a `catch` block, as returned by `jl_current_exception()`.

  * `enter`

    Enters an exception handler (`setjmp`). `args[1]` is the label of the catch block to jump to on
    error.  Yields a token which is consumed by `pop_exception`.

  * `leave`

    Pop exception handlers. `args[1]` is the number of handlers to pop.

  * `pop_exception`

    Pop the stack of current exceptions back to the state at the associated `enter` when leaving a
    catch block. `args[1]` contains the token from the associated `enter`.

    !!! compat "Julia 1.1"
        `pop_exception` is new in Julia 1.1.

  * `inbounds`

    Controls turning bounds checks on or off. A stack is maintained; if the first argument of this
    expression is true or false (`true` means bounds checks are disabled), it is pushed onto the stack.
    If the first argument is `:pop`, the stack is popped.

  * `boundscheck`

    Has the value `false` if inlined into a section of code marked with `@inbounds`,
    otherwise has the value `true`.

  * `copyast`

    Part of the implementation of quasi-quote. The argument is a surface syntax AST that is simply
    copied recursively and returned at run time.

  * `meta`

    Metadata. `args[1]` is typically a symbol specifying the kind of metadata, and the rest of the
    arguments are free-form. The following kinds of metadata are commonly used:

      * `:inline` and `:noinline`: Inlining hints.


### Method

A unique'd container describing the shared metadata for a single method.

  * `name`, `module`, `file`, `line`, `sig`

    Metadata to uniquely identify the method for the computer and the human.

  * `ambig`

    Cache of other methods that may be ambiguous with this one.

  * `specializations`

    Cache of all MethodInstance ever created for this Method, used to ensure uniqueness.
    Uniqueness is required for efficiency, especially for incremental precompile and
    tracking of method invalidation.

  * `source`

    The original source code (usually compressed).

  * `roots`

    Pointers to non-AST things that have been interpolated into the AST, required by
    compression of the AST, type-inference, or the generation of native code.

  * `nargs`, `isva`, `called`, `isstaged`, `pure`

    Descriptive bit-fields for the source code of this Method.

  * `min_world` / `max_world`

    The range of world ages for which this method is visible to dispatch.


### MethodInstance

A unique'd container describing a single callable signature for a Method. See especially [Proper maintenance and care of multi-threading locks](@ref)
for important details on how to modify these fields safely.

  * `specTypes`

    The primary key for this MethodInstance. Uniqueness is guaranteed through a
    `def.specializations` lookup.

  * `def`

    The `Method` that this function describes a specialization of. Or a `Module`,
    if this is a top-level Lambda expanded in Module, and which is not part of a Method.

  * `sparam_vals`

    The values of the static parameters in `specTypes` indexed by `def.sparam_syms`. For the
    `MethodInstance` at `Method.unspecialized`, this is the empty `SimpleVector`. But for a
    runtime `MethodInstance` from the `MethodTable` cache, this will always be defined and
    indexable.

  * `rettype`

    The inferred return type for the `specFunctionObject` field, which (in most cases) is
    also the computed return type for the function in general.

  * `inferred`

    May contain a cache of the inferred source for this function, or other information about
    the inference result such as a constant return value may be put here (if `jlcall_api ==
    2`), or it could be set to `nothing` to just indicate `rettype` is inferred.

  * `ftpr`

    The generic jlcall entry point.

  * `jlcall_api`

    The ABI to use when calling `fptr`. Some significant ones include:

      * 0 - Not compiled yet
      * 1 - JL_CALLABLE `jl_value_t *(*)(jl_function_t *f, jl_value_t *args[nargs], uint32_t nargs)`
      * 2 - Constant (value stored in `inferred`)
      * 3 - With Static-parameters forwarded `jl_value_t *(*)(jl_svec_t *sparams, jl_function_t *f, jl_value_t *args[nargs], uint32_t nargs)`
      * 4 - Run in interpreter `jl_value_t *(*)(jl_method_instance_t *meth, jl_function_t *f, jl_value_t *args[nargs], uint32_t nargs)`

  * `min_world` / `max_world`

    The range of world ages for which this method instance is valid to be called.


### CodeInfo

A temporary container for holding lowered source code.

  * `code`

    An `Any` array of statements

  * `slotnames`

    An array of symbols giving the name of each slot (argument or local variable).

  * `slottypes`

    An array of types for the slots.

  * `slotflags`

    A `UInt8` array of slot properties, represented as bit flags:

      * 2  - assigned (only false if there are *no* assignment statements with this var on the left)
      * 8  - const (currently unused for local variables)
      * 16 - statically assigned once
      * 32 - might be used before assigned. This flag is only valid after type inference.

  * `ssavaluetypes`

    Either an array or an `Int`.

    If an `Int`, it gives the number of compiler-inserted temporary locations in the
    function. If an array, specifies a type for each location.

  * `linetable`

    An array of source location objects

  * `codelocs`

    An array of integer indices into the `linetable`, giving the location associated
    with each statement.

Boolean properties:

  * `inferred`

    Whether this has been produced by type inference.

  * `inlineable`

    Whether this should be inlined.

  * `propagate_inbounds`

    Whether this should should propagate `@inbounds` when inlined for the purpose of eliding
    `@boundscheck` blocks.

  * `pure`

    Whether this is known to be a pure function of its arguments, without respect to the
    state of the method caches or other mutable global state.


## Surface syntax AST

Front end ASTs consist almost entirely of `Expr`s and atoms (e.g. symbols, numbers).
There is generally a different expression head for each visually distinct syntactic form.
Examples will be given in s-expression syntax.
Each parenthesized list corresponds to an Expr, where the first element is the head.
For example `(call f x)` corresponds to `Expr(:call, :f, :x)` in Julia.

### Calls

| Input            | AST                                |
|:---------------- |:---------------------------------- |
| `f(x)`           | `(call f x)`                       |
| `f(x, y=1, z=2)` | `(call f x (kw y 1) (kw z 2))`     |
| `f(x; y=1)`      | `(call f (parameters (kw y 1)) x)` |
| `f(x...)`        | `(call f (... x))`                 |

`do` syntax:

```julia
f(x) do a,b
    body
end
```

parses as `(do (call f x) (-> (tuple a b) (block body)))`.

### Operators

Most uses of operators are just function calls, so they are parsed with the head `call`. However
some operators are special forms (not necessarily function calls), and in those cases the operator
itself is the expression head. In julia-parser.scm these are referred to as "syntactic operators".
Some operators (`+` and `*`) use N-ary parsing; chained calls are parsed as a single N-argument
call. Finally, chains of comparisons have their own special expression structure.

| Input       | AST                       |
|:----------- |:------------------------- |
| `x+y`       | `(call + x y)`            |
| `a+b+c+d`   | `(call + a b c d)`        |
| `2x`        | `(call * 2 x)`            |
| `a&&b`      | `(&& a b)`                |
| `x += 1`    | `(+= x 1)`                |
| `a ? 1 : 2` | `(if a 1 2)`              |
| `a:b`       | `(: a b)`                 |
| `a:b:c`     | `(: a b c)`               |
| `a,b`       | `(tuple a b)`             |
| `a==b`      | `(call == a b)`           |
| `1<i<=n`    | `(comparison 1 < i <= n)` |
| `a.b`       | `(. a (quote b))`         |
| `a.(b)`     | `(. a b)`                 |

### Bracketed forms

| Input                    | AST                                  |
|:------------------------ |:------------------------------------ |
| `a[i]`                   | `(ref a i)`                          |
| `t[i;j]`                 | `(typed_vcat t i j)`                 |
| `t[i j]`                 | `(typed_hcat t i j)`                 |
| `t[a b; c d]`            | `(typed_vcat t (row a b) (row c d))` |
| `a{b}`                   | `(curly a b)`                        |
| `a{b;c}`                 | `(curly a (parameters c) b)`         |
| `[x]`                    | `(vect x)`                           |
| `[x,y]`                  | `(vect x y)`                         |
| `[x;y]`                  | `(vcat x y)`                         |
| `[x y]`                  | `(hcat x y)`                         |
| `[x y; z t]`             | `(vcat (row x y) (row z t))`         |
| `[x for y in z, a in b]` | `(comprehension x (= y z) (= a b))`  |
| `T[x for y in z]`        | `(typed_comprehension T x (= y z))`  |
| `(a, b, c)`              | `(tuple a b c)`                      |
| `(a; b; c)`              | `(block a (block b c))`              |

### Macros

| Input         | AST                                          |
|:------------- |:-------------------------------------------- |
| `@m x y`      | `(macrocall @m (line) x y)`                  |
| `Base.@m x y` | `(macrocall (. Base (quote @m)) (line) x y)` |
| `@Base.m x y` | `(macrocall (. Base (quote @m)) (line) x y)` |

### Strings

| Input           | AST                                 |
|:--------------- |:----------------------------------- |
| `"a"`           | `"a"`                               |
| `x"y"`          | `(macrocall @x_str (line) "y")`     |
| `x"y"z`         | `(macrocall @x_str (line) "y" "z")` |
| `"x = $x"`      | `(string "x = " x)`                 |
| ``` `a b c` ``` | `(macrocall @cmd (line) "a b c")`   |

Doc string syntax:

```julia
"some docs"
f(x) = x
```

parses as `(macrocall (|.| Core '@doc) (line) "some docs" (= (call f x) (block x)))`.

### Imports and such

| Input               | AST                                          |
|:------------------- |:-------------------------------------------- |
| `import a`          | `(import (. a))`                             |
| `import a.b.c`      | `(import (. a b c))`                         |
| `import ...a`       | `(import (. . . . a))`                       |
| `import a.b, c.d`   | `(import (. a b) (. c d))`                   |
| `import Base: x`    | `(import (: (. Base) (. x)))`                |
| `import Base: x, y` | `(import (: (. Base) (. x) (. y)))`          |
| `export a, b`       | `(export a b)`                               |

### Numbers

Julia supports more number types than many scheme implementations, so not all numbers are represented
directly as scheme numbers in the AST.

| Input                   | AST                                                     |
|:----------------------- |:------------------------------------------------------- |
| `11111111111111111111`  | `(macrocall @int128_str (null) "11111111111111111111")` |
| `0xfffffffffffffffff`   | `(macrocall @uint128_str (null) "0xfffffffffffffffff")` |
| `1111...many digits...` | `(macrocall @big_str (null) "1111....")`                |

### Block forms

A block of statements is parsed as `(block stmt1 stmt2 ...)`.

If statement:

```julia
if a
    b
elseif c
    d
else
    e
end
```

parses as:

```
(if a (block (line 2) b)
    (elseif (block (line 3) c) (block (line 4) d)
            (block (line 5 e))))
```

A `while` loop parses as `(while condition body)`.

A `for` loop parses as `(for (= var iter) body)`. If there is more than one iteration specification,
they are parsed as a block: `(for (block (= v1 iter1) (= v2 iter2)) body)`.

`break` and `continue` are parsed as 0-argument expressions `(break)` and `(continue)`.

`let` is parsed as `(let (= var val) body)` or `(let (block (= var1 val1) (= var2 val2) ...) body)`,
like `for` loops.

A basic function definition is parsed as `(function (call f x) body)`. A more complex example:

```julia
function f(x::T; k = 1) where T
    return x+1
end
```

parses as:

```
(function (where (call f (parameters (kw k 1))
                       (:: x T))
                 T)
          (block (line 2) (return (call + x 1))))
```

Type definition:

```julia
mutable struct Foo{T<:S}
    x::T
end
```

parses as:

```
(struct true (curly Foo (<: T S))
        (block (line 2) (:: x T)))
```

The first argument is a boolean telling whether the type is mutable.

`try` blocks parse as `(try try_block var catch_block finally_block)`. If no variable is present
after `catch`, `var` is `#f`. If there is no `finally` clause, then the last argument is not present.

### Quote expressions

Julia source syntax forms for code quoting (`quote` and `:( )`) support interpolation with `$`.
In Lisp terminology, this means they are actually "backquote" or "quasiquote" forms.
Internally, there is also a need for code quoting without interpolation.
In Julia's scheme code, non-interpolating quote is represented with the expression head `inert`.

`inert` expressions are converted to Julia `QuoteNode` objects.
These objects wrap a single value of any type, and when evaluated simply return that value.

A `quote` expression whose argument is an atom also gets converted to a `QuoteNode`.

### Line numbers

Source location information is represented as `(line line_num file_name)` where the third
component is optional (and omitted when the current line number, but not file name,
changes).

These expressions are represented as `LineNumberNode`s in Julia.

### Macros

Macro hygiene is represented through the expression head pair `escape` and `hygienic-scope`.
The result of a macro expansion is automatically wrapped in `(hygienic-scope block module)`,
to represent the result of the new scope. The user can insert `(escape block)` inside
to interpolate code from the caller.

Commit message:

add `splatnew` form; like `new` but accepts a tuple
This allows the core NamedTuple constructor to be defined without
generated functions.
With a bit of work in the front end it will also allow splatting
inside `new` in general.

doc/src/devdocs/ast.md, after:

# Julia ASTs

Julia has two representations of code. First there is a surface syntax AST returned by the parser
(e.g. the [`Meta.parse`](@ref) function), and manipulated by macros. It is a structured representation
of code as it is written, constructed by `julia-parser.scm` from a character stream. Next there
is a lowered form, or IR (intermediate representation), which is used by type inference and code
generation. In the lowered form there are fewer types of nodes, all macros are expanded, and all
control flow is converted to explicit branches and sequences of statements. The lowered form is
constructed by `julia-syntax.scm`.

First we will focus on the lowered form, since it is more important to the compiler. It is also
less obvious to the human, since it results from a significant rearrangement of the input syntax.

## Lowered form

The following data types exist in lowered form:

  * `Expr`

    Has a node type indicated by the `head` field, and an `args` field which is a `Vector{Any}` of
    subexpressions.
    While almost every part of a surface AST is represented by an `Expr`, the IR uses only a
    limited number of `Expr`s, mostly for calls, conditional branches (`gotoifnot`), and returns.

  * `Slot`

    Identifies arguments and local variables by consecutive numbering. `Slot` is an abstract type
    with subtypes `SlotNumber` and `TypedSlot`. Both types have an integer-valued `id` field giving
    the slot index. Most slots have the same type at all uses, and so are represented with `SlotNumber`.
    The types of these slots are found in the `slottypes` field of their `MethodInstance` object.
    Slots that require per-use type annotations are represented with `TypedSlot`, which has a `typ`
    field.

  * `CodeInfo`

    Wraps the IR of a method. Its `code` field is an array of expressions to execute.

  * `GotoNode`

    Unconditional branch. The argument is the branch target, represented as an index in
    the code array to jump to.

  * `QuoteNode`

    Wraps an arbitrary value to reference as data. For example, the function `f() = :a` contains a
    `QuoteNode` whose `value` field is the symbol `a`, in order to return the symbol itself instead
    of evaluating it.

  * `GlobalRef`

    Refers to global variable `name` in module `mod`.

  * `SSAValue`

    Refers to a consecutively-numbered (starting at 1) static single assignment (SSA) variable inserted
    by the compiler. The number (`id`) of an `SSAValue` is the code array index of the expression whose
    value it represents.

  * `NewvarNode`

    Marks a point where a variable (slot) is created. This has the effect of resetting a variable to undefined.


### Expr types

These symbols appear in the `head` field of `Expr`s in lowered form.

  * `call`

    Function call (dynamic dispatch). `args[1]` is the function to call, `args[2:end]` are the arguments.

  * `invoke`

    Function call (static dispatch). `args[1]` is the MethodInstance to call, `args[2:end]` are the
    arguments (including the function that is being called, at `args[2]`).

  * `static_parameter`

    Reference a static parameter by index.

  * `gotoifnot`

    Conditional branch. If `args[1]` is false, goes to the index identified in `args[2]`.

  * `=`

    Assignment. In the IR, the first argument is always a Slot or a GlobalRef.

  * `method`

    Adds a method to a generic function and assigns the result if necessary.

    Has a 1-argument form and a 4-argument form. The 1-argument form arises from the syntax `function foo end`.
    In the 1-argument form, the argument is a symbol. If this symbol already names a function in the
    current scope, nothing happens. If the symbol is undefined, a new function is created and assigned
    to the identifier specified by the symbol. If the symbol is defined but names a non-function,
    an error is raised. The definition of "names a function" is that the binding is constant, and
    refers to an object of singleton type. The rationale for this is that an instance of a singleton
    type uniquely identifies the type to add the method to. When the type has fields, it wouldn't
    be clear whether the method was being added to the instance or its type.

    The 4-argument form has the following arguments:

      * `args[1]`

        A function name, or `false` if unknown. If a symbol, then the expression first
        behaves like the 1-argument form above. This argument is ignored from then on. When
        this is `false`, it means a method is being added strictly by type, `(::T)(x) = x`.

      * `args[2]`

        A `SimpleVector` of argument type data. `args[2][1]` is a `SimpleVector` of the
        argument types, and `args[2][2]` is a `SimpleVector` of type variables corresponding
        to the method's static parameters.

      * `args[3]`

        A `CodeInfo` of the method itself. For "out of scope" method definitions (adding a
        method to a function that also has methods defined in different scopes) this is an
        expression that evaluates to a `:lambda` expression.

      * `args[4]`

        `true` or `false`, identifying whether the method is staged (`@generated function`).

  * `const`

    Declares a (global) variable as constant.
  * `null`

    Has no arguments; simply yields the value `nothing`.

  * `new`

    Allocates a new struct-like object. First argument is the type. The [`new`](@ref) pseudo-function is lowered
    to this, and the type is always inserted by the compiler.  This is very much an internal-only
    feature, and does no checking. Evaluating arbitrary `new` expressions can easily segfault.

  * `splatnew`

    Similar to `new`, except field values are passed as a single tuple. Works similarly to
    `Base.splat(new)` if `new` were a first-class function, hence the name.

  * `return`

    Returns its argument as the value of the enclosing function.

  * `the_exception`

    Yields the caught exception inside a `catch` block, as returned by `jl_current_exception()`.

  * `enter`

    Enters an exception handler (`setjmp`). `args[1]` is the label of the catch block to jump to on
    error.  Yields a token which is consumed by `pop_exception`.

  * `leave`

    Pop exception handlers. `args[1]` is the number of handlers to pop.

  * `pop_exception`

    Pop the stack of current exceptions back to the state at the associated `enter` when leaving a
    catch block. `args[1]` contains the token from the associated `enter`.

    !!! compat "Julia 1.1"
        `pop_exception` is new in Julia 1.1.

  * `inbounds`

    Controls turning bounds checks on or off. A stack is maintained; if the first argument of this
    expression is true or false (`true` means bounds checks are disabled), it is pushed onto the stack.
    If the first argument is `:pop`, the stack is popped.

  * `boundscheck`

    Has the value `false` if inlined into a section of code marked with `@inbounds`,
    otherwise has the value `true`.

  * `copyast`

    Part of the implementation of quasi-quote. The argument is a surface syntax AST that is simply
    copied recursively and returned at run time.

  * `meta`

    Metadata. `args[1]` is typically a symbol specifying the kind of metadata, and the rest of the
    arguments are free-form. The following kinds of metadata are commonly used:

      * `:inline` and `:noinline`: Inlining hints.


### Method

A unique'd container describing the shared metadata for a single method.

  * `name`, `module`, `file`, `line`, `sig`

    Metadata to uniquely identify the method for the computer and the human.

  * `ambig`

    Cache of other methods that may be ambiguous with this one.

  * `specializations`

    Cache of all MethodInstance ever created for this Method, used to ensure uniqueness.
    Uniqueness is required for efficiency, especially for incremental precompile and
    tracking of method invalidation.

  * `source`

    The original source code (usually compressed).

  * `roots`

    Pointers to non-AST things that have been interpolated into the AST, required by
    compression of the AST, type-inference, or the generation of native code.

  * `nargs`, `isva`, `called`, `isstaged`, `pure`

    Descriptive bit-fields for the source code of this Method.

  * `min_world` / `max_world`

    The range of world ages for which this method is visible to dispatch.


### MethodInstance

A unique'd container describing a single callable signature for a Method. See especially [Proper maintenance and care of multi-threading locks](@ref)
for important details on how to modify these fields safely.

  * `specTypes`

    The primary key for this MethodInstance. Uniqueness is guaranteed through a
    `def.specializations` lookup.

  * `def`

    The `Method` that this function describes a specialization of. Or a `Module`,
    if this is a top-level Lambda expanded in Module, and which is not part of a Method.

  * `sparam_vals`

    The values of the static parameters in `specTypes` indexed by `def.sparam_syms`. For the
    `MethodInstance` at `Method.unspecialized`, this is the empty `SimpleVector`. But for a
    runtime `MethodInstance` from the `MethodTable` cache, this will always be defined and
    indexable.

  * `rettype`

    The inferred return type for the `specFunctionObject` field, which (in most cases) is
    also the computed return type for the function in general.

  * `inferred`

    May contain a cache of the inferred source for this function, or other information about
    the inference result such as a constant return value may be put here (if `jlcall_api ==
    2`), or it could be set to `nothing` to just indicate `rettype` is inferred.

  * `ftpr`

    The generic jlcall entry point.

  * `jlcall_api`

    The ABI to use when calling `fptr`. Some significant ones include:

      * 0 - Not compiled yet
      * 1 - JL_CALLABLE `jl_value_t *(*)(jl_function_t *f, jl_value_t *args[nargs], uint32_t nargs)`
      * 2 - Constant (value stored in `inferred`)
      * 3 - With Static-parameters forwarded `jl_value_t *(*)(jl_svec_t *sparams, jl_function_t *f, jl_value_t *args[nargs], uint32_t nargs)`
      * 4 - Run in interpreter `jl_value_t *(*)(jl_method_instance_t *meth, jl_function_t *f, jl_value_t *args[nargs], uint32_t nargs)`

  * `min_world` / `max_world`

    The range of world ages for which this method instance is valid to be called.


### CodeInfo

A temporary container for holding lowered source code.

  * `code`

    An `Any` array of statements

  * `slotnames`

    An array of symbols giving the name of each slot (argument or local variable).

  * `slottypes`

    An array of types for the slots.

  * `slotflags`

    A `UInt8` array of slot properties, represented as bit flags:

      * 2  - assigned (only false if there are *no* assignment statements with this var on the left)
      * 8  - const (currently unused for local variables)
      * 16 - statically assigned once
      * 32 - might be used before assigned. This flag is only valid after type inference.

  * `ssavaluetypes`

    Either an array or an `Int`.

    If an `Int`, it gives the number of compiler-inserted temporary locations in the
    function. If an array, specifies a type for each location.

  * `linetable`

    An array of source location objects

  * `codelocs`

    An array of integer indices into the `linetable`, giving the location associated
    with each statement.

Boolean properties:

  * `inferred`

    Whether this has been produced by type inference.

  * `inlineable`

    Whether this should be inlined.

  * `propagate_inbounds`

    Whether this should should propagate `@inbounds` when inlined for the purpose of eliding
    `@boundscheck` blocks.

  * `pure`

    Whether this is known to be a pure function of its arguments, without respect to the
    state of the method caches or other mutable global state.


## Surface syntax AST

Front end ASTs consist almost entirely of `Expr`s and atoms (e.g. symbols, numbers).
There is generally a different expression head for each visually distinct syntactic form.
Examples will be given in s-expression syntax.
Each parenthesized list corresponds to an Expr, where the first element is the head.
For example `(call f x)` corresponds to `Expr(:call, :f, :x)` in Julia.

### Calls

| Input            | AST                                |
|:---------------- |:---------------------------------- |
| `f(x)`           | `(call f x)`                       |
| `f(x, y=1, z=2)` | `(call f x (kw y 1) (kw z 2))`     |
| `f(x; y=1)`      | `(call f (parameters (kw y 1)) x)` |
| `f(x...)`        | `(call f (... x))`                 |

`do` syntax:

```julia
f(x) do a,b
    body
end
```

parses as `(do (call f x) (-> (tuple a b) (block body)))`.

### Operators

Most uses of operators are just function calls, so they are parsed with the head `call`. However
some operators are special forms (not necessarily function calls), and in those cases the operator
itself is the expression head. In julia-parser.scm these are referred to as "syntactic operators".
Some operators (`+` and `*`) use N-ary parsing; chained calls are parsed as a single N-argument
call. Finally, chains of comparisons have their own special expression structure.

| Input       | AST                       |
|:----------- |:------------------------- |
| `x+y`       | `(call + x y)`            |
| `a+b+c+d`   | `(call + a b c d)`        |
| `2x`        | `(call * 2 x)`            |
| `a&&b`      | `(&& a b)`                |
| `x += 1`    | `(+= x 1)`                |
| `a ? 1 : 2` | `(if a 1 2)`              |
| `a:b`       | `(: a b)`                 |
| `a:b:c`     | `(: a b c)`               |
| `a,b`       | `(tuple a b)`             |
| `a==b`      | `(call == a b)`           |
| `1<i<=n`    | `(comparison 1 < i <= n)` |
| `a.b`       | `(. a (quote b))`         |
| `a.(b)`     | `(. a b)`                 |

### Bracketed forms

| Input                    | AST                                  |
|:------------------------ |:------------------------------------ |
| `a[i]`                   | `(ref a i)`                          |
| `t[i;j]`                 | `(typed_vcat t i j)`                 |
| `t[i j]`                 | `(typed_hcat t i j)`                 |
| `t[a b; c d]`            | `(typed_vcat t (row a b) (row c d))` |
| `a{b}`                   | `(curly a b)`                        |
| `a{b;c}`                 | `(curly a (parameters c) b)`         |
| `[x]`                    | `(vect x)`                           |
| `[x,y]`                  | `(vect x y)`                         |
| `[x;y]`                  | `(vcat x y)`                         |
| `[x y]`                  | `(hcat x y)`                         |
| `[x y; z t]`             | `(vcat (row x y) (row z t))`         |
| `[x for y in z, a in b]` | `(comprehension x (= y z) (= a b))`  |
| `T[x for y in z]`        | `(typed_comprehension T x (= y z))`  |
| `(a, b, c)`              | `(tuple a b c)`                      |
| `(a; b; c)`              | `(block a (block b c))`              |

### Macros

| Input         | AST                                          |
|:------------- |:-------------------------------------------- |
| `@m x y`      | `(macrocall @m (line) x y)`                  |
| `Base.@m x y` | `(macrocall (. Base (quote @m)) (line) x y)` |
| `@Base.m x y` | `(macrocall (. Base (quote @m)) (line) x y)` |

### Strings

| Input           | AST                                 |
|:--------------- |:----------------------------------- |
| `"a"`           | `"a"`                               |
| `x"y"`          | `(macrocall @x_str (line) "y")`     |
| `x"y"z`         | `(macrocall @x_str (line) "y" "z")` |
| `"x = $x"`      | `(string "x = " x)`                 |
| ``` `a b c` ``` | `(macrocall @cmd (line) "a b c")`   |

Doc string syntax:

```julia
"some docs"
f(x) = x
```

parses as `(macrocall (|.| Core '@doc) (line) "some docs" (= (call f x) (block x)))`.

### Imports and such

| Input               | AST                                          |
|:------------------- |:-------------------------------------------- |
| `import a`          | `(import (. a))`                             |
| `import a.b.c`      | `(import (. a b c))`                         |
| `import ...a`       | `(import (. . . . a))`                       |
| `import a.b, c.d`   | `(import (. a b) (. c d))`                   |
| `import Base: x`    | `(import (: (. Base) (. x)))`                |
| `import Base: x, y` | `(import (: (. Base) (. x) (. y)))`          |
| `export a, b`       | `(export a b)`                               |

### Numbers

Julia supports more number types than many scheme implementations, so not all numbers are represented
directly as scheme numbers in the AST.

| Input                   | AST                                                     |
|:----------------------- |:------------------------------------------------------- |
| `11111111111111111111`  | `(macrocall @int128_str (null) "11111111111111111111")` |
| `0xfffffffffffffffff`   | `(macrocall @uint128_str (null) "0xfffffffffffffffff")` |
| `1111...many digits...` | `(macrocall @big_str (null) "1111....")`                |

### Block forms

A block of statements is parsed as `(block stmt1 stmt2 ...)`.

If statement:

```julia
if a
    b
elseif c
    d
else
    e
end
```

parses as:

```
(if a (block (line 2) b)
    (elseif (block (line 3) c) (block (line 4) d)
            (block (line 5 e))))
```

A `while` loop parses as `(while condition body)`.

A `for` loop parses as `(for (= var iter) body)`. If there is more than one iteration specification,
they are parsed as a block: `(for (block (= v1 iter1) (= v2 iter2)) body)`.

`break` and `continue` are parsed as 0-argument expressions `(break)` and `(continue)`.

`let` is parsed as `(let (= var val) body)` or `(let (block (= var1 val1) (= var2 val2) ...) body)`,
like `for` loops.

A basic function definition is parsed as `(function (call f x) body)`. A more complex example:

```julia
function f(x::T; k = 1) where T
    return x+1
end
```

parses as:

```
(function (where (call f (parameters (kw k 1))
                       (:: x T))
                 T)
          (block (line 2) (return (call + x 1))))
```

Type definition:

```julia
mutable struct Foo{T<:S}
    x::T
end
```

parses as:

```
(struct true (curly Foo (<: T S))
        (block (line 2) (:: x T)))
```

The first argument is a boolean telling whether the type is mutable.

`try` blocks parse as `(try try_block var catch_block finally_block)`. If no variable is present
after `catch`, `var` is `#f`. If there is no `finally` clause, then the last argument is not present.

### Quote expressions

Julia source syntax forms for code quoting (`quote` and `:( )`) support interpolation with `$`.
In Lisp terminology, this means they are actually "backquote" or "quasiquote" forms.
Internally, there is also a need for code quoting without interpolation.
In Julia's scheme code, non-interpolating quote is represented with the expression head `inert`.

`inert` expressions are converted to Julia `QuoteNode` objects.
These objects wrap a single value of any type, and when evaluated simply return that value.

A `quote` expression whose argument is an atom also gets converted to a `QuoteNode`.

### Line numbers

Source location information is represented as `(line line_num file_name)` where the third
component is optional (and omitted when the current line number, but not file name,
changes).

These expressions are represented as `LineNumberNode`s in Julia.

### Macros

Macro hygiene is represented through the expression head pair `escape` and `hygienic-scope`.
The result of a macro expansion is automatically wrapped in `(hygienic-scope block module)`,
to represent the result of the new scope. The user can insert `(escape block)` inside
to interpolate code from the caller.
